{module: lfo}

## LFO (Low Frequency Oscillator)

Used optionally to modulate the Oscillators’ frequencies and the cut-off frequency of the Filter, to create vibrato effects or slow sweeping timbre changes. The Mod Wheel (left) can be used to adjust the amount of modulation, and a fixed amount can be set which can be made to come in gradually after a delay when a note is played, adding an expressive quality. Further expressiveness can be added by making this delay shorter the harder you press the note.

Noise can be used to modulate, which gives ragged or glitchy effects, especially with brown noise set by the Global>Noise selector.

{control: waveform}
### Waveform

The type of signal used for modulation.

| --- | ---
| ? | Sine wave
| ? | Triangle wave
| ? | Ramp-up sawtooth
| ? | Ramp-down sawtooth
| ? | Square wave
| ? | Sample and hold (random stepped wave)
| ? | Noise, type determined by Global>Noise selector (note the Rate control has no effect here)

{control: frequency}
### Rate or Frequency

The rate of the modulating wave, or the sample rate in the case of sample and hold. Has no effect when noise is selected.

{control: modWheelAmount}
### Mod Wheel Amount

Controls the maximum modulation introduced by the Mod Wheel. Is applied on top of the Level control.

{control: delay}
### Delay

Controls the delay before the modulation set by the Level control kicks in, zero = no delay. Can be combined with the Expression control to make the delay velocity sensitive.

{control: fixedAmount}
### Level

The minimum amount of modulation when Mod Wheel is on minimum. Works in conjunction with the Delay and Expression controls.

{control: expression}
### Expression

Adds more modulation when keys are pressed harder. When the Delay control is non-zero, it also shortens the delay when keys are pressed harder.

{define: osc-common}

The two Oscillators generate tones which are the basis of the sounds generated by the instrument. A range of different timbres can be created by mixing different waveforms with different frequency offsets, with more extreme sounds possible using the Cross-Mod control in Oscillator 2.

{control: waveform}
### Waveform

The type of signal generated by the oscillator.

| --- | ---
| ? | Sine wave
| ? | Triangle wave
| ? | Sawtooth
| ? | Square wave

{control: range}
### Range

The octave range of the frequencies, broadly in feet as in organ stops, although this is just a guide. Higher numbers gives higher tones.

{control: tune}
### Semitones

Adjusts the frequency offset by plus or minus fixed semitones.

{control: fineTune}
### Fine Tune

Allows fine tuning of the frequency offset by up to plus or minus a semitone. Useful for creating detune effects, where the oscillators are slightly out of tune giving depth and movement to the sound.

{control: modAmount}
### Modulation

Controls the amount of frequency modulation applied using the LFO. A negative amount causes the reverse effect, i.e. the frequency is raised when it would have been lowered if a positive amount had been set.

{end-define}

{module: osc1}
## Oscillator 1
{include: osc-common}

{control: noiseLevel1 > level}
### Noise

Controls the amount of noise mixed into the sound, for creating breathy effects. The type of noise is set using the Common>Noise selector.

{control: oscLevel1 > level}
### Level

Controls the amount of Oscillator 1 signal in the mix.

{module: osc2}
## Oscillator 2
{include: osc-common}

{control: crossModAmount}
### Cross-Modulation

This frequency modulates the Oscillator 2 signal using the signal from Oscillator 1. This introduces some complexity to the waveform, and can create some beautiful bell like effects similar to those created by FM synthesisers. It can also create some extremely ugly noises! As a guide, begin experimenting with sine waves or triangular waves, and bear in mind that it can throw the tuning way out, so you may need to fiddle with the frequency offsets of the two Oscillators, i.e. Semitones and Fine Tune, to get the instrument back in tune. There is a C4 (middle C) tone generator above to help you with that.

{control: oscLevel2 > level}
### Level

Controls the amount of Oscillator 2 signal in the mix.

{define: envelope}

When a key is pressed the envelope rises linearly to its maximum level in the time set by Attack, then decays exponentially to the Sustain level in the time set by Decay. When the key is released, the envelope reduces exponentially to zero in the time set by Release. Velocity allows expression by making the envelope levels proportional to how hard the key is pressed. The Expression control adds further expression by shortening the Attack time the harder the key is pressed.

{control: attackSeconds}
### Attack

The time taken for the envelope to rise linearly to it’s maximum level. The Expression control can also affect this by shortening it when the key is pressed harder.

{control: decaySeconds}
### Decay

The time taken for the envelope to fall exponentially from its maximum value to the sustain value.

{control: sustainLevel}
### Sustain

The level to which the envelope falls and sustains until the key is released.

{control: releaseSeconds}
### Release

The time take for the envelope to fall exponentially to zero when the key is released.

{control: velocityAmount}
### Velocity

When zero, the envelope is fixed; when turned up, the maximum and sustain levels increase with how hard the key is pressed.

{control: expression}
### Expression

When turned up, the attack time is shortened when the key is pressed harder. This allows for more distinct expressiveness.

{end-define}

{module: loudnessEnvelope}
## Amp Envelope

This envelope shapes how the loudness of the note changes with time after a key press.

{include: envelope}

{module: filterEnvelope}
## Filter Envelope

This envelope affects how the cut-off frequency of the Filter module changes over time after a key press, and the amount of effect it has can be controlled using the Filter>Envelope control.

{include: envelope}

{module: filter}
## Filter

The filter shapes the sound by reducing and boosting certain frequencies, and can be controlled by the LFO and the Filter Envelope. 

{control: type}
### Pass

| --- | ---
| LOW | Reduces frequencies above the Cut-Off frequency
| BAND | Reduces frequencies above and below the Cut-Off frequency. This is only effective in conjunction with the Resonance control; with that set to zero, the response is flat. The amount of fall off above and below increases with higher resonance values
| HIGH | Reduces frequencies below the Cut-Off frequency

{control: rolloff}
### Rolloff/oct

This is the strength of the filter, expressed as the number of dBs reduction for every octave away from the Cut-Off frequency.

{control: frequency}
### Cut-Off

The point above and/or below which frequencies are reduced, and also the frequency boosted if the Resonance control is non-zero.

{control: resonance}
### Resonance

The amount of boost at the Cut-Off frequency

{control: envelopeAmount}
### Envelope

The degree to which the Filter Envelope affects the Cut-Off frequency.

{control: modAmount}
### Modulation

The degree to which the LFO affects the Cut-Off frequency.

{control: keyboardFollowAmount}
### Follow Keys

The degree to which the Cut-Off frequency follows the pitch of the note played. When at maximum, it follows it exactly, allowing musical notes to be made from a noise only source using a high Resonance value.

{module: global}
## Global

This panel contains controls that affect the whole instrument.

{control: voiceAllocator > numberOfVoices}
### Voices

The number of different notes that can be played at the same time. When set to 1 or LEG. (legato), it behaves as a monophonic instrument. Legato causes the envelopes to continue on to the next note without triggering the attack phase, if played without releasing the previous one. 1 causes a new attack phase for each note change.

{control: voiceAllocator > glideTime}
### Glide Time

The time it takes to glide from one note to another when Glide Type is not OFF.

{control: noise > type}
### Noise
The type of noise generated by the global noise source. This is used in the LFO and Oscillator 1. 

{control: voiceAllocator > glideType}
### Glide Type

| --- | ---
| OFF | The frequency jumps instantly to the next note
| ALL | The frequency always glides from one note to the next at a rate set by Glide Time
| LEGATO | Only notes played without releasing the previous one will glide

Glide can be used with more than one voice, with unpredictable but sometimes pleasing results!

{control: envelopeStretch}
### Envelope Stretch

Natural instruments like pianos have a long decay on low notes and a shorter decay on high notes. Turning Envelope Stretch on simulates this behaviour.